---
layout: post
title: Jenkins
---

[Jenkins](https://www.jenkins.io) is an open source automation software. It automates the various phases of software development.
- Build
- Test
- Deployment/Delivery 

# Table of Contents
- [CI/CD](#ci-cd)
- [Install Jenkins](#install-jenkins)
- [First job](#first-job)
- [Copy job](#copy-job)
- [Linking jobs](#linking-jobs)
- [Trigger build from GitHub](#trigger-build-from-github)
- [Deploy Java App to Tomcat](#deploy-java-app-to-tomcat)
- [Archive artifact](#archive-artifact)
- [Copy artifact](#copy-artifact)
- [Scheduling](#scheduling)


## CI/CD
### Continuous Integration (CI)
- CI is the practice of frequently integrating code from multiple developers. 
- Every commit or push to a central repository triggers automated build and test.
- Build/Test failure triggers an alert to developers.

### Continuous Delivery (CD)
- A practice where code changes are automatically built, tested, and prepared for a release to production. 
- Requires manual approval before deployment.

### Continuous Deployment (CD)
- A practice where code changes are automatically built, tested, and deployed to production. 

## Install Jenkins
1. Jenkins can be deployed as [container or java](https://www.jenkins.io/doc/book/installing/) WAR but I will install it using the old fashioned way on Ubuntu 22.04. I follow the [instructions](https://www.jenkins.io/doc/book/installing/linux/#debianubuntu) on Jenkins website. 

1. Jenkins has two releases - Weekly release and LTS release. I will use the LTS release.

1. It requires Java. I will install Java 21 which is compatible with the latest LTS (2.479.1 October 2024) at the time of writing this.

1. Install Java
    ```
    sudo apt update -y
    sudo apt install fontconfig openjdk-21-jre -y
    ```

    Verify
    ```
    java -version
    openjdk version "21.0.8" 2025-07-15
    OpenJDK Runtime Environment (build 21.0.8+9-Ubuntu-0ubuntu122.04.1)
    OpenJDK 64-Bit Server VM (build 21.0.8+9-Ubuntu-0ubuntu122.04.1, mixed mode, sharing)
    ```

1. Add Jenkins repository
    ```
    sudo wget -O /etc/apt/keyrings/jenkins-keyring.asc \
    https://pkg.jenkins.io/debian-stable/jenkins.io-2023.key
    echo "deb [signed-by=/etc/apt/keyrings/jenkins-keyring.asc]" \
    https://pkg.jenkins.io/debian-stable binary/ | sudo tee \
    /etc/apt/sources.list.d/jenkins.list > /dev/null
    sudo apt update -y
    ```
1. Install Jenkins
    ```
    sudo apt install jenkins -y
    ```

    Enable and start Jenkins
    ```
    sudo systemctl --now jenkins
    ```

    Verify
    ```
    sudo systemctl status jenkins
    ```

    Jenkins should ve available at http://localhost:8080. 

    To change the default port 8080 to some other port, edit the following file and restart Jenkins
    ```
    grep 8080   /usr/lib/systemd/system/jenkins.service
    Environment="JENKINS_PORT=8080"
    ```
    The Jenkins config file and parameter to edit may change. 
1. Get the admin password from `/var/lib/jenkins/secrets/initialAdminPassword`
1. Go to http://locahost:8080
1. Follow the on screen steps
1. Jenkins is ready

## First Job
1. Go to Jenkins
1. New Item
1. Provide a name: Job1
1. Freestyle project
1. Build Steps
    1. Execute shell
    1. Command: echo "My first Jenkins job"
1. Save
1. Build Now
1. Go to Console Output to see the output

## Copy job
To use an existing job as the basis for a new job, we can copy it.

1. In Jenkins > New Item 
1. Provide a job name: Job2 
1. Scroll down > Copy from 
1. Enter the source job: Job1
1. Customize the job
1. Or save it and customize later

## Linking jobs
We can link jobs and create a dependency chain.  This way, the success of a job can automatically start a sequence of subsequent jobs, automating workflows by linking build, test, and deployment stages. 

- Upstream jobs are projects that trigger other jobs
- Downstream jobs are the projects that are triggered by the upstream job.


1. Lets make another copy of the First Job and name it Job3.
1. We will link them such that the success of Job1 triggers Job2 and Job3: Job1 > Job2 > Job3
1. Go to Job1 > Configure 
    1. Add post-build action
    1. Build other projects
    1. Projects to build: Job2
    1. Save
    1. Go to Status, you will see Job2 under Downstream Projects. Likewise, in Job2 Status, you will see Job1 is the upstream project.
1. Go to Job3 > Configure
    1. Triggers
    1. Build after other projects are built
    1. Projects to watch: Job2
    1. Status page of Job2 and Job3 will show the respective Downstream and Upstream projects.

Trigger a build of Job1 and observe the chain reaction. Inspect the build of Job2 and Job3 and notice how the build was triggered.

## Trigger build from GitHub 
We can trigger Jenkins build from GitHub using Webhook. In this section, we will do the following:
1. Configure GitHub and Jenkins integration using webhook
1. Make change from GitHub

Configure the integration
1. In Jenkins > Manage Jenkins (the gear icon) > System > GitHub > Advance > Override Hook URL
1. Jenkins runs on my local host. GitHubs won't be able to access it. To expose Jenkins to the internet, I use ngrok.
1. Get ngrok url for Jenkins
    ```
    ngrok http 8080
    ```
    Copy the ngrok URL `https://example.ngrok-free.app`
1. Go to your GitHub repository > Settings > Webhooks
1. In Payload URL, paste the ngrok url and append github-webook, don't miss the trailing slash: `https://example.ngrok-free.app/github-webhook/`
1. Add webhook

Create a Jenkins Job
1. New Item > Enter a name > Freestyle project > OK
1. Source Code Management > Git
1. Enter the repository htts url under Repository URL
1. Branches to build > main
1. Triggers > GitHub hook trigger for GITScm polling
1. Save
1. To test > Build Now

Trigger build from GitHub
1. Go to the GitHub repository 
1. Edit some file and commit
1. This should trigger a build. In Jenkins, if you don't see a new build, refresh the page.
1. Click on the build, you should see "Started by GitHub push by user_name".

This is **Continuous Integration**.

We made a commit from GitHub GUI. Let us know commit with git CLI

1. Clone the repository
    ```
    git clone URL
    ```
1. cd <DIR>
1. Make some change
1. git add . && git commit -m "message"
1. In Jenkins > Go to the job
1. There should be a new build
1. Open the build. Inspect the status, changes and Console Output.


Modern IDEs such as VS Code has integrations with git/GitHub.We can commit and push changes from VS Code itself.

1. Open the repository in VS Code
2. Make some changes
2. Go the Source Control
2. Enter a commit message and click Commit
2. To push to remote, click Sync Changes
2. In Jenkins, go to the job and inspect the latest build.

## Deploy Java App to Tomcat
We will do a one click deployment of  Java App to Tomcat. We will need maven to build the java App as well. 

The Vagrant file I use for this setup is available here: [cicd-jenkins-tomcat](https://github.com/rualthan/vagrantfiles/tree/main/cicd-jenkins-tomcat). It has Jenkins running at 8080 and two instances of Tomcat, 8090(lets call it prod) and 9090 (staging).


1. We first need to find the install directory of Maven and Java. 
    ```
    which mvn
    /opt/maven/bin/mvn

    readlink -f $(which java)
    /usr/lib/jvm/java-17-openjdk-arm64/bin/java
    ```
    These are the paths to the binaries. The install directory will be `/opt/maven` and `/usr/lib/jvm/java-17-openjdk-arm64/`.

1. Since we want Jenkins to build Java code, it has to know where java and maven are installed. 
   In Jenkins > Go to Manage Jenins > Tools
    - Java installations > Add JDK
    - Name: Java17
    - JAVA_HOME:/usr/lib/jvm/java-17-openjdk-arm64/ 
    - Maven Installations > Add Maven
    - Name: Maven3.8.8
    - MAVEN_HOME:/opt/maven/

1. In Jenkins, install the plugin Deploy to Container. We need this to deploy a  WAR file to Tomcat.
1. In GitHub, fork this https://github.com/PythonAwsBoto3/webapp

We are ready to create a job in Jenkins.
1. New Item > Provide a Name > Freestyle Project
1. Source Code Management > Git > Provide the repository URL
1. Build Steps > Add build step >Invoke top-level Maven targets >
    - Maven Version: Maven3.8.8
    - Goals: package
    - Maven has 7 lifestyles and package is one of them. It packages the compiled code into its distributable format (e.g., a JAR or WAR file). 

1. Post-build Actions > Add post-build action > Deploy war/ear to a container 
    - WAR/EAR files:**/*.war
    - Containers > Add Container > Tomcat 9x
    - Add the Tomcat credentials
    - Add Tomcat URL. For me, it is http://localhost:8090
1. Build Now

If the build is successful.

- Go to Tomcat
- Manager App
- Click on /mvn-hello-world
- Your App is deployed

Lets change the job to automatically trigger a new build when there's a change in the source code.

1. Open the job in Jenkins > Configure > Triggers > Poll SCM
1. It uses cron syntax for schedule. For our example, I will use "* * * * *" for Jenkins to check the repository every minute.
1. In the repository, open webapp/src/main/webapp/index.jsp
1. Make some change.
1. This should trigger the job in the next 1 minute in Jenkins.
1. Once the job ran, check the outcome in <tomcat_url>/mvn-hello-world.

So what's happening here? We take a source code, build it and then deploy. This is **Continuous Deployment**. Of course, we don't have a test step here.

## Archive artifact
In this section, we will take the source code, build it but stop short of deploying it. We will archive the artifact instead and keep it ready for deployment. This is **Continuous Delivery**.

Artifact is the tangible outcome of a software development process. It can be files, documents or even Docker images.


1. Copy the job created in the [previous section](#deploy-java-app-to-tomcat).
1. Open the job > Configure
1. Delete the "Deploy war/ear to a container"  section.
1. Add post-build action > Archive the artifacts
1. Files to archive: **/*.war
1. Build Now
1. Go Workspace > job_name > target
1. Locate the artifact mvn-hello-world.war

## Copy artifact
We can have a job make use of the artifact generated by other jobs. Let's use the artifact created by the [Archive artifact](#archive-artifact) job and deploy it to our staging Tomcat instance running on port 9090.

1. Go to Jenkins > Manage > Jenkins > Plugins
1. Available plugins > Install Copy Artifact plugin
1. Create a new Freestyle job
1. Build Steps > Copy artifacts from another project 
1. Project Name: Enter the source job name
1. Which build: Latest successful build
1. Artifacts to copy: **/*.war
1. Post-build Actions > Add post-build action > Deploy war/ear to a container 
    - WAR/EAR files:**/*.war
    - Containers > Add Container > Tomcat 9x
    - Add the Tomcat credentials
    - Add Tomcat URL. This time, it will be http://localhost:9090
1. Save
1. Build Now

If the build is successful.

- Go to Tomcat, staging instance: http://localhost:9090
- Manager App
- Click on /mvn-hello-world
- Your App is deployed

